My brothers were considerably younger than myself; but I 
had a friend in one of my schoolfellows, who compensated for 
this deficiency. Henry Clerval was the son of a merchant of 
Geneva, an intimate friend of my father. He was a boy of sin- 
gular talent and fancy. I remember, when he was nine years 
old, he wrote a fairy tale, which was the delight and amaze- 
ment of all his companions. His favourite study consisted in 
books of chivalry and romance; and when very young, I can 
remember, that we used to act plays composed by him out 
of these favourite books, the principal characters of which 
were Orlando, Robin Hood, Amadis, and St. George. 

No youth could have passed more happily than mine. My 
parents were indulgent, and my companions amiable. Our 
studies were never forced; and by some means we always 
had an end placed in view, which excited us to ardour in 
the prosecution of them. It was by this method, and not by 
emulation, that we were urged to application. Elizabeth was 
not incited to apply herself to drawing, that her companions 
might not outstrip her; but through the desire of pleasing her 
aunt, by the representation of some favourite scene done 
by her own hand. We learned Latin and English, that we 
might read the writings in those languages; and so far from 
study being made odious to us through punishment, we 
loved application, and our amusements would have been 
the labours of other children. Perhaps we did not read so 
many books, or learn languages so quickly, as those who are 
disciplined according to the ordinary methods; but what we 
learned was impressed the more deeply on our memories. 

I feel pleasure in dwelling on the recollections of child- 
hood, before misfortune had tainted my mind, and changed 
its bright visions of extensive usefulness into gloomy and 
narrow reflections upon self. But, in drawing the picture of 
my early days, I must not omit to record those events which 
led, by insensible steps to my after tale of misery: for when I 
would account to myself for the birth of that passion, which af- 
terwards ruled my destiny, I find it arise, like a mountain river, 
from ignoble and almost forgotten sources; but, swelling as 
it proceeded, it became the torrent which, in its course, has 
swept away all my hopes and joys. 

Natural philosophy is the genius that has regulated my 
fate; I desire therefore, in this narration, to state those facts 
which led to my predilection for that science. When I was 
thirteen years of age, we all went on a party of pleasure 
to the baths near Thonon: the inclemency of the weather 
obliged us to remain a day confined to the inn. In this house 
I chanced to find a volume of the works of Cornelius Agrippa. 
I opened it with apathy; the theory which he attempts to 
demonstrate, and the wonderful facts which he relates, soon 
changed this feeling into enthusiasm. A new light seemed to 
dawn upon my mind; and, bounding with joy, I communicated 
my discovery to my father. I cannot help remarking here 
the many opportunities instructors possess of directing the 
attention of their pupils to useful knowledge, which they 
utterly neglect. My father looked carelessly at the title-page 
of my book, and said, "Ah! Cornelius Agrippa! My dear 
Victor, do not waste your time upon this; it is sad trash." 

Nor were these my only visions. The raising of ghosts 
or devils was a promise liberally accorded by my favourite 
authors, the fulfilment of which I most eagerly sought; and if 
my incantations were always unsuccessful, I attributed the 
failure rather to my own inexperience and mistake, than to a 
want of skill or fidelity in my instructors. 

The natural phenomena that take place every day be- 
fore our eyes did not escape my examinations. Distillation, 
and the wonderful effects of steam, processes of which my 
favourite authors were utterly ignorant, excited my astonish- 
ment; but my utmost wonder was engaged by some experi- 
ments on an air-pump, which I saw employed by a gentleman 
whom we were in the habit of visiting. 

The ignorance of the early philosophers on these and 
several other points served to decrease their credit with me: 
but I could not entirely throw them aside, before some other 
system should occupy their place in my mind. 

She died calmly; and her countenance expressed affec- 
tion even in death. I need not describe the feelings of those 
whose dearest ties are rent by that most irreparable evil, the 
void that presents itself to the soul, and the despair that is 
exhibited on the countenance. It is so long before the mind 
can persuade itself that she, whom we saw every day, and 
whose very existence appeared a part of our own, can have 
departed for ever — that the brightness of a beloved eye can 
have been extinguished, and the sound of a voice so famil- 
iar, and dear to the ear, can be hushed, never more to be 
heard. These are the reflections of the first days; but when 
the lapse of time proves the reality of the evil, then the actual 
bitterness of grief commences. Yet from whom has not that 
rude hand rent away some dear connexion; and why should 
I describe a sorrow which all have felt, and must feel? The 
time at length arrives, when grief is rather an indulgence than 
a necessity; and the smile that plays upon the lips, although 
it may be deemed a sacrilege, is not banished. My mother 
was dead, but we had still duties which we ought to perform; 
we must continue our course with the rest, and learn to think 
ourselves fortunate, whilst one remains whom the spoiler 
has not seized. 

The day of my departure at length arrived. I had taken 
leave of all my friends, excepting Clerval, who spent the last 
evening with us. He bitterly lamented that he was unable 
to accompany me: but his father could not be persuaded to 
part with him, intending that he should become a partner 
with him in business, in compliance with his favourite theory, 
that learning was superfluous in the commerce of ordinary 
life. Henry had a refined mind; he had no desire to be idle, 
and was well pleased to become his father's partner, but he 
believed that a man might be a very good trader, and yet 
possess a cultivated understanding. 

We sat late, listening to his complaints, and making many 
little arrangements for the future. The next morning early 
I departed. Tears gushed from the eyes of Elizabeth; they 
proceeded partly from sorrow at my departure, and partly 
because she reflected that the same journey was to have 
taken place three months before, when a mother's blessing 
would have accompanied me. 

